We've
got 15 minutes with you in the capacity of Minister
for Racing, so I'll hand straight over to you for any opening
remarks.
Well, you've got my opening remarks- ... issued around the table.
Can I ask the people next to me to introduce themselves to you?
Please.
Perhaps starting with my left, go left. Yes.
Good morning. My name is Hoani Lambert.
I'm the Acting Secretary for the Department of Internal Affairs.
And good day, I'm Hayden Kerr. I'm a Principal Policy Advisor at the department,
specializing in racing.
And we've also got our Chief Financial Officer, Brett Warren.
Oh, sorry. Good morning. Brett Warren, Acting Chief Financial Officer.
Do you want to make any opening remarks, Minister?
No.
Sent it.
Yeah, we've got that. And are you happy to go straight into questions?
Well, yes.
Well, I mean-
Fantastic
... we're all stuck for time here.
Sounds good. In which case, I'll hand over to Tangi Etekiri.
We'll cut to the chase, so to speak. To use a racing term.
Thank you, Minister. Just got a couple of questions about the report that
sort of surfaced in the public around
the TAB Advisory Committee report.
Are you intending to make that public anytime soon?
Look, we're considering at the moment, and we're about to do a reply on it.
So can I wait until that happens?
Okay.
Sure.
The other question is, your party has declared
around $300,000 in donations
from individuals associated on that committee who authored the
report.
Why should New Zealanders not see
this as anything other than effectively donors preparing a
report for you to sign off?
Because I've had this job three times.
Once under the then Labor Party, when they hadn't given
me one brass razoo, and I still did the same policy back then.
Nothing's changed in this policy for 21 years.
I've always thought racing could recover if it had the right injection and the
right policies, and we'd
set out to make that happen. So in all those years, we never got a 5 cents from
them, but we still did it. So that underlines the purity of our intentions.
And the second thing is, unlike the Labor Party, we don't have members of the union
who are sitting on our board as well.
So the amount of influence this independent body over there,
which I see you don't have any problem with, call the workers, 15
out of every 100. Yet they're sitting on your own boards and on your
committees. How can that be a level of separation
and purity?
At least I've got that.
Thank you. My other question is about the Racing Integrity Board.
You'll know that this is something that I often ask about.
Because integrity is important. Are you satisfied
with the current level of funding for the RIB and their ability
to be able to undertake the work that they do?
Yes, I am, because if I wasn't,
I'd assume that they would've spoken to me about that.
And I ran into one just two days ago, purely by accident, but he didn't
raise it with me at the time, which is what you'd expect to happen if they
wanted more resources. Or it could be that they understand that
we're all short of resources at the moment.
So I'll have a look at that. But at this point in time, I've not
heard them say to me that they want more resources.
I'll pause.
Yeah. Steve Abel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, in your written opening
remarks, you refer to the closure of the greyhound racing industry.
I wonder if you could
expand on how that's going and whether you perceive there might be any
public
costs around that, or if you
understand that all of the costs will be covered by the TAB.
Well, look,
it's going seriously well, as difficult as
it has been.
We're talking about,
on our best measurements, 1,700 dogs we've got to find a place
for starting with the
1st of August.
That's when it'll be kicked into place, and there's this three-stage program
on that. We do have serious resources on the basis
of
having
the ability to, if we're required to, spend money to
relocate those dogs.
We're not saying how much that is or why that is
because it's always been part and parcel of our plan
to complete the job, and possibly by
2029 or 2030, we'll have wrapped the whole thing
up. It's a three-stage program. Do we have the resources?
Yes, we do.
But it's not going to be resources applied to compensation.
This is a seriously supported, across
all political parties, change. You'll see that in the United States at the
moment. There's only two courses in the United States.
In the whole of the United States, there's only two courses, and they're both in
West Virginia.
Tasmania has followed us,
and I don't think it won't be too long before New South Wales will.
So as Wales. So things have moved very fast since our
cross-party decision, and so at the present time, yes, we
do, I believe, have the resources to do a thoroughly
competent job as we set out to do.
Supplementary, Chair.
Steve Abel.
Are you finding that those members of the greyhound industry who are obviously
distraught at the closure, but
is there an
amicable
relationship with the agency charged with that task
and-
I think there's an amicable relationship with the agency, but not with the
minister.
Despite that Parliament universally voted for this, they hold me
responsible,
which was okay.
Thank you.
Can I start?
Yeah. Tony, you can go ahead.
Thank you. Minister, just on greyhounds.
Are you concerned,
over recent weeks, there have been suggestions that some industry participants
are trying to get around the fact that the ban is coming in by
potentially looking to move greyhounds and the like.
Does that concern you in terms of the impact?
What do you say, move what?
Like charter flights, those sorts of things.
You mean move them offshore?
Yeah.
Well, the chance, the reality is that nothing that we set
out in the legislation prohibits that.
If they can sell them offshore, none of us at the time we
passed this legislation thought we should prescribe that.
And so am I concerned?
Well, I'm concerned for the continuation of the industry,
but it'll be no longer within our jurisdiction to stop them.
And to be fair, as a democracy, that's all we can do.
I just think there'll be fewer places to send them.
If New South Wales decides to go with us, there'll be no
place to send them then
Hmm. I guess,
no, that's fine.
Minister, Ōtaki Māori Racing Club
got their--
probably holding the next event in a couple of weeks.
How do you see the future for clubs like that?
What's on the horizon for some of our
local sort of more grassroots clubs, and a unique one in Ōtaki?
Well, it's cute you should raise that because that's the oldest racing club in the
country.
That's right.
The second thing is to do that, to give them credit,
they should have a big race a year, one seriously big race to identify who they
are, because they're a really unique, special club.
And it's still my view, back in 2005, when we set
out to try and raise some serious prize money, that was always on our
agenda
to have Ōtaki in there.
But that only lasted five years for the National Party canceled the program
in 2011. But again,
that's the kind of place that should survive for long term.
Although we have a problem at the moment in the racing industry,
and is that they will not rationalize in the way that Thaddeus McCarthy set out
fifty-five years ago,
and
Massara set out only seven years ago.
We've still got a long way to go, but that's what
they're being asked to do, and they're being asked to
get on with it because
it gets a bit of a pain in the butt, so to speak.
Rationalize in terms of reducing the number of horses-
Yeah, reducing the venues. We're not really down to the venues that Massara
reported. Or all those years ago,
McCarthy reported.
Who-
So that's the frustrating thing. If they want to be the industry they could be,
then they should be rationalizing it and setting out to add another billion dollars
to their wealth creation target.
Yeah. I noticed that the Matariki event is actually the Levin Racing Club holding
it at Ōtaki Māori.
But if Levin Racing Club is sold, who should get the money from that
sale? Should it go back to the local club?
It should go to the authority that set them up in the first place.
Okay.
Well, we've got some classic cases in this country where they have racing
clubs that are stubbornly holding out. They've got no future.
They've got no plans. Everything they've got in terms of going forward
is going to cost the industry to keep them going, not the other way around.
They're meant to be subscribing to the industry.
So here we are after all these years
getting rather concerned about the lack of progress
or not enough progress.
Steve Abel, we've still got a couple of minutes.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, there's an allocation around
offshore betting charges. I wonder if you've received any advice as to
whether the offshore betting charges regime has
successfully reduced revenue loss
to overseas betting operations.
Peter again.
Would you like me to take this one?
Yes, please.
So, with the introduction of the online monopoly of
the legislation that was passed in 2025, that the
offshore charges in relation to the POC, which is what the department receives
from and
distributes,
is basically no longer required because people can't bet with
overseas providers. The legislation, some of the members might
recall,
left the POC in place for another
two years or could be brought back earlier-
Mm-hmm
... just to account for bets that might have been placed on-
Cast
... in the future.
Mm.
And
messages have gone out to the industry already to say that the money is actually
just dropped off after the first quarter. It's just dropped off.
Right.
And so the intention is to repeal those POC charges,
those provisions in the act soon.
So it's been a success the mono-
The monopoly was just brought about-
Yes
... always intended to add an additional revenue supply to the industry, and it's
been successful in that.
Yep.
Now that the online monopoly is in place, it is no longer needed.
Thank you.
Okay. Have I missed anyone around the table for asking?
Thank you, Minister, for your time today and to the officials.
We're going to move on to immunity management.
Minister and-
Good morning
... our NEMA team. We've got 45 minutes with you this
morning, so I'll hand over to you for some opening comments and then-
Thank you, Mr. Chair
... questions.
Yeah.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you, committee. It's good to see you all this morning.
I'll make my comments very short because it's your time.
Oh, and very quickly, sorry, obviously, Mark Mitchell, Minister of Emergency
Management, and with me is
Dave Coran, Chief Executive, NEMA.
And Gina Rogers, Deputy Chief Executive at NEMA.
Yeah.
New Zealand is facing more frequent and complex emergencies.
Already this year, we've seen 23 states of emergency, compared
to eight for the whole of 2025.
This is placing sustained pressure on communities and the emergency management
system,
and demonstrates how quickly disasters can unfold with devastating
consequences.
We know the system needs to be strengthened. The government is clear on this.
In response, we are progressing the Strengthening Emergency Management program to
ensure New Zealand is better prepared to manage these kind of events.
Cabinet has agreed the direction of this work in principle.
This includes lifting national capability, strengthening coordination across the
system, and improving how we support communities through response and recovery.
A key part of this is modernizing the technology that underpins emergency
management, as outdated and fragmented systems can
slow decision-making and create real risks during emergencies.
Through the Emergency Management Sector Operational Systems, or EMSOS
program, we are investing in modern integrated tools, including a common operating
picture, so our emergency management personnel can share real-time information,
improve situational awareness, and make faster, better decisions when it
matters most.
The Emergency Management Bill is also a critical part of this work.
It will update the legislative framework and address gaps identified through recent
events and inquiries, particularly around roles, responsibilities, and
national-level coordination. I want to acknowledge the important contribution of
this committee in supporting the bill's progression.
Alongside this, NEMA is delivering improvements across the system.
This includes strengthening operational readiness and lifting capability across the
emergency management workforce. We acknowledge there are no quick fixes.
Strengthening the system will take sustained effort over time.
However, progress has been made and work is underway, and the work
underway is focused on addressing key challenges while building overall
resilience. I want to acknowledge the work of NEMA and the wider
emergency management sector. They continue to respond to events across the
country while delivering these improvements.
And I also wanted to just acknowledge
this committee
for the work you've done on the legislation.
I'd like to take the opportunity to officially acknowledge Camilla Belich and her
role
for a good two years,
because it's a strange portfolio, this one, in terms of the opposition have got a
critical role to play.
And it's not just here in Wellington, it's actually out on the ground.
So I want to acknowledge
the work that she's done. And Kush, I want to acknowledge you taking on the
emergency management portfolio.
You've been at many of these events with me as well.
And Francisco particularly, I wanted to acknowledge you and the work that you've
done,
and the support and the input that you've had as well.
In my view, when it comes
to national security emergency management, it should be bipartisan, and I just want
to acknowledge the bipartisanship that has been brought to the work that's been
done on this.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I'll hand over to the committee.
Thank you. We're starting with Francisco Hernandez, and then Kush
Panmari manually.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you for the acknowledgement, Minister.
I'd also wanted to acknowledge that the government has worked with the
opposition quite often in good faith.
Well, always in good faith when it has come to this emergency management
field. And we've enjoyed the briefings and the working
together with not just you, but everyone in this committee in this really important
national affair.
Mm-hmm.
My question is around something that you touched on around the increasing nature
of risk in New Zealand, and one of the central findings of the Climate
Change Commission's National Climate Change Risk Assessment
earlier this year is that $235 billion
of just building assets is at risk.
And a report from IAG New Zealand shows that the ratio
around 97% of government expenditure goes towards post-disaster
response and recovery, while only 3% goes to risk
reduction and resilience. But we do know that investing upfront in
adaptation can deliver good benefits.
You always see this climate adaptation investment framework
shows that the benefit cost ratio is about two to one to 10 to one.
So we know that investing in upfront protection is cheaper than trying to patch
things up after most of the time. So my question is, what work have you been
doing and has NEMA been doing at a macro level to sort of shift the
system from just emergency response to investing
upfront in adaptation and resilience responses?
Yeah, really good question. And I'll allow Dave and Jenna to
contribute to this one as well. I think that number one, Simon Watts has sort of
been doing a lot of work around climate adaptation.
And of course, we have input to that, and I'm involved in that too, in my
role with NEMA.
Yes, you're right, is that we're going to continue as a country to have to look at
how we continue to invest into our resilience.
This year, through this budget, we announced an additional
$400 million towards
infrastructure resilience. And a lot of that primarily relates
to the ongoing recovery. Bearing in mind that I think currently,
we've got about at least 60% of the country still in recovery
from these events. Is that about right, Dave?
That is-
Yeah
... yes, Minister.
Of course, I just want to acknowledge my associate minister, Chris Penk, who now
has
got a real focus on recovery.
But you're right, Francisco, it's about
getting the balance right as a government in terms of
reduction, readiness, response, and
recovery. And I guess, in terms of the amount of events that we have been
having to deal with, there has been a real focus for me on picking up on what
Sir Jerry Mateparae sort of delivered in his report after
Cyclone Gabrielle.
Because the strength of your response will also dictate, in some
way, the strength of your recovery.
And I just want to acknowledge NEMA,
and our broader, wider civil defense ecosystem right throughout the whole
country, mayors, chief executives, controllers, our first
responders, community groups, iwi, hapū,
rural trusts.
It's true to say that the best response is the whole of society.
The best way to actually get prepared and prevent and try and mitigate risk
is whole of society.
And the best way to move into a really strong recovery is whole of society.
And without a doubt, we've seen our country shift and
understand that. And in terms of
IAG, I had the new CEO of IAG New Zealand in my office
about three or four weeks ago, and he was very complimentary
in terms of what we're doing here and the way that we're identifying and managing
our risk. Which is important, because it has implications around obviously
insurance cover and things like that.
Thank you. Kristina?
Tēnā koe, e te Minita.
Tēnā.
Mōrena kōrua, mōrena koutou katoa.
Thank you for the acknowledgments, and I want to acknowledge your team as well, who
ensure a cross-party coordinated approach.
So-
Thank you
... thank you all.
We know that Budget '26 is going to invest just over 352
million in Safety Net.
In each
emergency we've been at together, we've seen,
the crucial role of Marae in particular, and as you've acknowledged, iwi
groups, community groups. To what extent have they been
involved, Marae, Māori, iwi, in the design of
Safety Net, and to what extent will they be
expected to help implement it?
Yeah, so I'll turn to Dave on the details in terms of Safety Net.
In a broader sort of response,
iwi and hapū have a critically important role to play in emergency management.
They're actually very good at it. And so the NEMA
team have been engaging heavily, obviously through the iwi
leaders. We've had Keri Allen and Marama Royal, who have done an
enormous amount of work on the
Emergency Management Bill.
But in terms of the detail around Safety Net, I'll pass to Dave on
that.
Thank you, Minister.
I've been on the board of NGCC as it's now.
I presume you're referring to the Public Safety Net that's going to be stood up on
the 1st of July. Is that correct?
Yes.
So it transitions from
what has been a project designed primarily around
communication systems for emergency
services, police, fire and emergency,
St John and
Wellington Free. When it stands up on the 1st of
July, the intent is to broaden that
beyond emergency services because the utility of
all of the capability that is coming on board is
far broader than that, including across the emergency
management system, which includes iwi
Māori. And those opportunities are being explored.
I'm not sure on the detail, in terms of what NGCC
have explored with iwi Māori specifically.
But they have gone out and asked for registrations of interest very
broadly as a first phase to look at, in
part, the viability of standing up Public Safety Net with
the broader
benefits that that will bring to
both response but also that early recovery phase
of this. So it's an exciting program.
I think this is the way to go and that ability to broaden
the benefits of that while still protecting the
primacy of emergency services to be able to respond
appropriately is the direction of travel that is both
appropriate and gives opportunities to the likes of
iwi Māori.
And the other thing is that iwi will be able to actually engage with the new entity
to look at what their products are and what they'd actually
like to
engage with around products that may be useful for
emergency management or other
issues. But at the moment, the primary focus has been our first responders,
primarily police, fire, Wellington Free, and
St John's.
Marae have widely been acknowledged as ideal
response hubs.
Will a portion of that budget be
allocated towards upkeep maintenance so that they
continue operating in that capacity?
And will they be able to operate in that capacity as they are now, or will there
be expectations?
You're referring to the NGCC budget?
No, I'm referring to the Safety Net budget.
Sorry, Safety Net, NGCC.
Yeah.
I'm not sure how they're developing it.
I'm not part of the board or anything that's been stood up.
Actually, it's only been approved yesterday.
Mm-hmm.
In terms of that. But as I say, the benefits, should they
choose to engage within it, because it is a Crown
Schedule 4 company.
So, within the construct of that, those who choose to engage will
get the benefits of it. I'm not sure what the allocation
of the funding is. The funding as it is at the moment, the
envelope, which is significant, is to design and
build the network in the first instance.
And that's the key piece of work that NGCC,
the predecessor of Public Safety,
has been working through with the
consults, with the contractors,
to build this network, which includes a significant number of
towers,
capability in terms of communications equipment, card
systems. It's genuinely a redevelopment of
what is absolutely essential-
Oh, yeah. No, that makes sense
... for the effective running of emergency
services, which also provides security in terms of people
previously being able to listen in, now not being able to do so and so on.
And it brings them all together. Sorry, I-
Yeah. No.
Sorry. I wasn't referring to MSOS.
I was talking about the overall-
Oh, no, that's not MSOS. That's the NGCC.
Yeah. I'm talking about the overall allocation of budget to ensure effective
delivery of services. Has there been consideration about if Marae are still
going to be expected to be resilience hubs?
Will there be any budget allocation to help with the upkeep,
et cetera?
You're referring to NEMA's budget or...?
The emergency management budget.
So, I think, yes, the government is committed to making sure that
Marae are properly supported, and you would've seen that we've made some changes
this year, due to the frequency of the weather events, particularly up
north,
to make sure that money is made available quickly,
for Marae to be able to replenish and deal with their own
resilience, in dealing with these events.
That is the government's approach to that, and it's not going to change.
Supplementary. One final thing on this, and then-
Yeah. We'll, sup first for Kristina,
and then-
Yeah. Resync. Syn it
... and then a sup to Honorable Ms. Lake.
Thank you. I know that the
Māori Climate Platform does not sit under your delegations, but
were you asked for or did you provide advice on it
ending?
The Māori Climate Platform that gave under the
climate-
I don't recall having been consulted on that, no.
Okay. Thank you.
So supplementary, Honorable Ms. Lake.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Minister, for being here.
I'm really interested in the next generation critical communications because that
is about making sure that we have a safe and a
resilient infrastructure that actually not only protects the
information, but it has the ability to make sure that all of
the arms of the operations on emergency is actually working
safely. So how can you actually be sure that the
system will be that good?
Because we've actually had IT-
Yes, chair
... deliverables that did not actually get delivered and- ... I'm trying to be...
I don't know how to actually word this.
No, you're right in saying.
Yeah, but you know what I'm actually getting at.
Regardless of who's in government, there's not a proud history over the decades of
delivering IT.
No. So, what I'm actually saying is that how is this going to be different?
Yeah. No, but they are... Look, I just have to say that the team there quite
simply are outstanding. They've had a focus on quality.
They've trialed the products as they've come online.
It's a great new story. One of the products that they delivered, and I
can't get right, because I don't understand the technical side of it completely.
But it allows them, what it means is they can now ping a phone of someone that a
missing person. And we've saved lives because of that, because of the
technology that's actually been put in place.
And you've got two sides of it. You've got the telecommunications side, and you've
got the handheld radios and the, uh...
And it's being rolled out, it's being trialed around the country.
It's going very, very well. So, everything is on track.
Still a lot of work to be done around sites, the developments of sites.
Tait has come in as a very good partner
with the NGCC, and everything is on track.
Right. Obviously, the cabinet actually feels confidence in this project-
Yeah, no, they've-
... that they've actually put aside $1.4 billion for the next 10
years.
Yes, and because it's a critically important project for us, without a doubt,
as government.
So there's-
It's well on track. It's well on track. I get regular updates.
I speak with the chair, who is Rob Fyfe,
on a regular basis. And I'm out actually viewing
and checking on the products themselves and how they're operating now that we-
Can I just have one more? How does this actual system compare with something that
is actually being of use overseas?
Well, it's going to modernize our system.
For example, we've got,
between Auckland and Hamilton, they're working on analog and digital systems that
don't talk to one another.
So, without a doubt, we have to do a serious upgrade and modernize our
communication systems for our first responders.
And by the way, with the new entity, it won't just be first responders, it'll be
iwi and hapū, it'll be
utility companies that will want to come and get involved and actually be part of
this overall communications network.
Thank you.
If I can just add, if I can, Minister The only other place that I'm
aware that it is of the level
that we're moving to is in the United States, and one of
the architects of that is actually on the
board.
And I do know-
On the board of?
On the board of NGCC.
NGCC.
And I do know that Australia are particularly interested in some of
the elements within this. For example,
emergency services, when you get this overload of
calls coming in on the network, get priority call.
So if you're part of this police, it doesn't matter how overloaded it is, police
will automatically go to
the front of the queue, for example, or fire or whatever it is.
So there are elements in this that are quite
unique in terms of generally when you're speaking about it internationally.
But it has been rolled out very successfully in the United States.
Australia are very interested in how we're actually getting after this, so this is
a really exciting piece that will, as the minister said-
Continue
... really le-- yeah.
We've got some advantages because we don't
have a federal or state system.
We just have national services and agencies.
So no, it's going to be transformational without a doubt.
Good.
Great for public safety.
That's answered your SUP. So just before we move on to primaries from
Andy Foster and Francisco and Andy as well on safety net
technology, are there any other SUPs?
In which case I've got one, and then we'll move to Andy Foster
as just a common operating picture and the
technology in that space. How is that progressing, or what does the future look
like over the next four years of this budget period in terms of aligning
COP across the different POCs?
Yeah, I think the only comment that I'd make on that, and we've talked about this a
fair bit, is
that NEMA, it's a big project without a doubt.
Mm-hmm.
And it's got to be done carefully. But there is no mood to go
for a bespoke system. It's quite simply looking around the world,
finding, identifying best in class, and then taking that and
adapting it to our conditions.
SUP on that one.
Okay, thanks.
What are the risks, and are there any safeguards for any lapses that might happen
during the transition?
With NGCC?
Yeah.
No. So that's been really well managed in that they're doing that through the
pilots and the trials that they're running around the country.
So yes, no, all of those issues around
gaps in
performance or gaps in response are being well managed.
Andy Foster.
Yeah, just one final thing on that in terms of SUP.
Just the timeframe for delivery of this seems like it's progressive delivery, and
also that it'll be really good to get a picture at some stage of what it can
do. The stuff you're talking about already-
Yeah
... as you know, I think the public as a whole will be very interested in-
Well, I know the-
... knowing what the system can do and-
Well, I know the team would love to host you.
I'd love to show the committee what they're doing.
So if the committee's interested in that, then we can arrange a visit.
Thanks. Yeah.
Where they can talk you through the products that they've already got out there,
changes that have already been made,
how far through the implementation they are, and they can give you
a demonstration of exactly what they're doing.
Yeah. But whereabouts are they based?
Here in Wellington.
Yeah.
Should be easy. Yeah.
That'd be great. Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. Here in Wellington.
Thank you.
So if that's a new question, since you've been waiting, we'll go to Andy.
Yeah.
And we will come back around.
Okay. So I just want to, in terms of a primary, just pick up on the
issues that you raised about the whole of system and everybody being in this
together, and also Francisco raised as well.
When we went going through the bill, we had quite a lot of discussion around the
role of NEMA in the planning side
or the role that it doesn't have in the planning side or should have.
But also the role with councils in terms of land use planning, et cetera, not
putting things in the wrong places.
Because you've got the same people being chief executives and mayors,
who are doing planning at the same time they've also got a role in emergency
management as well. But they're talking to themselves effectively.
You're engaged in that process, so we're putting the fence at the top of the cliff
rather than that, what did you say?
$235 billion buildings-
buildings
... already sitting in places which they probably shouldn't be.
But so that we actually, as we go forward, we try and, we might not reduce the
number of incidents that there are, but we'll certainly reduce the impacts
of those incidents. And the other bit of the all in it together was we had quite a
lot of discussion from a lot of those agencies, some of those agencies you've just
been mentioning, about their involvement and their ability to be involved when
there is an emergency declared. Some of them were sort of saying, "Well, kind of at
the moment getting pushed out and we're not being allowed to be engaged." And one
that springs to mind was the contractors, who obviously have to do a lot of the
cleanup and all that sort of stuff, and they're going, "Well, actually, we get
shoved off to the side, and we'd actually like to just get out there and
fix stuff straight away. But if we do that, someone tells us we're going to be
prosecuted."
Yeah, I think the con-
Yeah
I agree with you. The contractors are the unsung heroes.
Because when you are on the ground at 1:00 in the morning-
It's them who face the risk
... clearing slips and yeah. But my experience is,
I'd be interested, bring that information forward if there's issues
around contractors, because my experiences
on the ground is that actually they've been recognized.
They're in the loop, they're in the meetings, and they're working very
closely with the councils. So that's been my
experience. The tragedy that we faced with Mount
Maunganui in Welcome Bay,
we actually held a first responders dinner that was hosted by police
about a month later, and I ensured that the contractors-
Good
... were invited and were present.
The young guys that were on the diggers
doing extremely difficult work. So no, full recognition.
You're absolutely right, is that often they're the unsung heroes, but we talk about
everyone else, not necessarily the contractors.
But on the ground, I haven't seen any issues around communications,
deployments or
coordination between local government, central government, and contractors.
Cool. And what about the planning side?
So sort of leaning in, just keeping from a planning point of view, if you see
something that you look at it and go, "That's a really bad idea," that there is the
ability for NEMA to sort of say, "Well, wow,
that's not looking very clever." Or likewise, for councils to actually
not have a left hand and a right hand who are talking to each other in this area,
and it's causing problems.
Can I talk to that?
Yeah, of course you can.
Nema.
I was just going to say, within the new bill,
there are now levers that enable-
Which strengthens those two
... both NEMA in terms of oversight,
but also a requirement on local government to
ensure that,
those who are
community or have an interest in the planning to actually engage with them at the
planning stage. And in the past, that hasn't necessarily been the
case.
So as that matures, I think we'll find that the very problems that you speak
of, and we are aware of those in some areas,
will actually start to
come together
far more effectively than they do at the moment.
The key element of all of that, though, is that whilst NEMA has
that oversight stewardship role,
and we're leaning in a lot more, the key relationship, and it doesn't matter
whether it's iwi or community groups or disaffected,
or contractors, the key relationship is at that local government
area. And the rules, tools, procedures, processes, all would have to
be able to enable that to be
occurring at the start. It's always too late after the
fact. Jen, I don't know whether you want to-
Yeah, I think it's something we've discussed, obviously, in previous select
committees as well, as the adaptation work's been advancing and the resource
management reforms alongside the Emergency Management Bill.
Is the bringing together of the long-term planning under the Local Government Act,
the seeding group plans for emergency management across all four hours,
and the adaptation planning. And I think the key
to bring those three planning instruments together more fulsomely, so they must
take account of one another as we will start to see better land use
planning being addressed.
That's what we tried to do a bit of that in the bill. So yeah.
No, well done.
Thank you.
Good work.
Francisca, and then-
Thank you, Chair. And sorry, I probably should have asked this as a supplementary
because it's responding to something you said.
Yeah.
But I only thought about the question after.
That's all right.
You mentioned you met with IAG.
Yes.
You had a briefing with them. I'm really interested in the role of the national
insurance system and how it's been responding to the increased
sort of storm and other emergency sort of actions and
how do you think it'll respond to a major event like the Alpine
fault rupture, for example?
Well, I mean, that
would be a major event for us, without a doubt.
And the scale would require surging from everyone, and we'd need a fair bit
of help from overseas, too.
But in answer to the first part of your question, we work very closely
and very well with the insurance council and with the insurance companies.
My experience on the ground is that they respond very quickly.
If I use an example of Wairarapa, that we're both, Krishna, on the ground
there. They had representatives on the ground
in the EOC,
the Emergency Operations Center, actually going and checking and
engaging with people around security needs, around insurance
needs. So no, I've been very impressed with them.
In fact, when I took the role on,
I must admit I was a little bit cynical.
Hmm.
But my attitude changed really quickly when I realized that they are very
motivated in looking after their customers,
and to an extent that they continually look for trying to develop new products
as well,
in light of the fact that
we are facing more of these events.
Krishna
.
My one's about workforce now. So with the new system
will come new technology, more information.
Do we have the capability
to analyze that information quickly or the
budget to grow that capacity? And
also, as we grow on the ground, the workers,
do we have a budget to
grow that workforce if it is needed?
Yes.
Yeah.
Do you want me to answer?
Yes. Yeah, in terms of the workforce-
She was looking at you, so
In terms of the, particularly the technology that's coming on with
MSOS, and as was discussed previously,
it will be introduced over the next two to three years.
But then there's the requirement to do exactly as you say, to grow the
capability in terms of analysts, the ability to fuse information.
Some of that will be through technology, including AI.
But you still need the human augmentation to that.
So yes, we have to
be able to recruit a workforce, grow it, integrate it,
and then mature it, and that maturing process doesn't happen overnight when you
bring something on like this because it will fundamentally even change the culture.
Yes, there is sufficient in the
budget that has been provided for the MSOS program
more generally, which does include the
ongoing operational costs, including personnel to manage that
intelligence and information fusion piece, as well as the
management of the data platforms and so on,
wherever they land after the
proposals come in.
Talked about the capabilities in our communities.
Will there be allocation to support their
knowledge of the system?
There certainly will be in terms of, we've got to actually bring the-
The communities along with the journey of this program, and
that includes education, not just of communities, because it will have the
ability to, its individual household,
community, local government, national government in terms of the
system that's going to be integrated for this and have a picture on a cellphone.
That does require absolutely the education side of
that in terms of understanding what the layers of information
are. And we are going to be putting in place a program
of both training and education in terms of how to use it,
effectively, across all of
society.
Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you. I'm interested in specific efforts that,
you know, might be undertaking to prepare for certain
disaster management situations.
The first is, obviously a big one, the Alpine fault rupture that you
kind of alluded to earlier.
Yeah.
What sort of work is being done? I know that there's awareness campaigns in
progress, but what other work is ongoing in this space?
Yeah, look, I'll let Dave or even,
John Price,
who's our harm director,
talk to more detail. So, obviously there's a lot of work going on
overall around the professionalization and coordination of our
emergency management system, nationally,
our first responders. At a local level, there are
often exercises run in anticipation of a major
event,
involving the Alpine Fault.
And I know that
John Price has also been running exercises nationally,
with different scenarios to make sure that we are testing and proving
where there can be improvement and what we need to be working on in relation to
being able to deal with a major event like that.
Dave and the team have got relationships with our partners overseas.
We send help to them when they need it, and
I'm confident they'll send help to us if we need it as well, if we had an
event of that size.
And the second emergency management event I'm curious about because
Queenstown is based, well, it's not in my electorate, but I'm one of
the buddy MPs for Queenstown. I'm really interested in the
wider Otago area. I'm really interested on whether there's been any progress on
the potential tsunami risk around Milford Sound and if there's been
anything that any preparations has been undertaken around that.
Yeah. So Dave, do you have any?
Yes, there is. In fact, we're just
about to fund a follow-on
research program to understand in far greater
granularity than we do at the moment what the impact of a
landslide tsunami would be on the
population that may be in Milford at the time.
And that can be as high as 4,000 people.
It is, I think, one of our biggest risks, in terms of
just the number of visitors that are there and the lack of
ability to create safe regions and
zones for them.
Mm-hmm.
What has been done in the interim, is an education program, and there are
boards
up in
Milford and before you go into the tunnel to alert people to the risks of
not going blind. But there's still a lot of work to do.
That research program, which will, as I said, provide that granularity,
is over the next two years. So it takes some time to actually
understand the bio...
I can't even say the word. The scientific terms that understand how
the waves interact with the ground and then the impact that
it has onshore. So there's still quite a lot of work to
do, but we're certainly not just sitting on our hands with that.
And that is in
partnership with Earth Sciences New Zealand, Southland,
Tourism and DOC.
And the other thing too, Francisco, is that we've--
So you've got a group of expert scientists that when we had, like we had a recent
event,
was it the Philippines?
Mm-hmm.
And-
The denial, yeah.
Yeah. So immediately,
we're looking to see how is that going to impact us,
certainly around tsunami risk. So a lot of maintenance done on
the buoys and
also our scientists and the experts are coming together and actually,
in my view, they've got even quicker in terms of being able to get
information to NEMA so that they can get that out to communities, and we can give
people plenty of warning if we think we are going to get a tidal surge or
a tsunami risk.
Just to follow up on the Milford Sound thing, if I may, Chair.
I think there was some research two years ago that showed that only around
5% would survive a Milford Sound tsunami in the best case scenario.
As a result of the preparation that's been undertaken since then, do you think
that has increased since two years ago from 5% to
much higher, if I could do that?
No.
Okay.
And I say that
it's not tongue in cheek or anything else.
Yes.
But the reality is if you've got that many people, and the lack
of
egress routes from the danger zones in terms of being able to get up
high and something that is very, very challenging-
Mm-hmm
... is of real concern. So, that
scientific evidence that came out that said actually as we understand it now, it's
probably only about a 4% to 5% survival
rate of that,
is real concern and that's why we're really chasing this hard.
But the science, we want it to be based on the evidence of
science and be quite sure in terms of as we understand
that what that might lead to in terms of how we manage that risk and what the
societal risk appetite might be for something like that is
the next phase of work that will be done in parallel to this.
We take it seriously. We don't mess around with it.
I don't know if you remember, was it last year when we
knew that we were definitely going to have some tidal surge?
And there was a risk of tsunami, and we sent out some-
By texts.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah. And both myself and John Price were the most unpopular guys in
the country for about three days. But the reality of it is that we're a coastal
nation, and there's a lot of people out on the beaches at
6:00 in the morning-
Mm
... accessing nature. And so we err on the side
of caution, and we'd rather give people information so they can make their own
decisions on things.
Okay. I've got
three subs covering a range of things.
Mm.
Yours is on that-
Specifically on that answer.
Okay. Do that, and then we've got Lamona, and then we've got Andy on all three
subs. So we'll get through them all.
We've got-
Very quickly, you were talking about you being the most unpopular person after
that tidal wave-
How true
... surge or whatever, text that actually, emergency notice that actually went out.
Wake everyone up at 6:00.
I just want to actually, I wanted to ask this question because
disasters happen, emergencies actually come about, weather events actually happen,
but the warning signs are really, really important.
Yeah.
And yet people actually, when that doesn't eventuate, they get really upset about
the notification that they actually got-
Yes
... because, "Well, it didn't ever happen, so why did I actually get a message?"
Yeah.
How important is it to convince the public that these
messages could save their lives?
Well, it's really important, and NEMA take a much more nuanced approach to it
than I did because they understand that there's got to be public education.
But I'm convicted on the fact that
we're a country that's sort of been, "She'll be right, mate, glass half
full."
Mm.
We've got all these reports that keep highlighting that in terms of failures and
loss of life. We don't have the luxury for that anymore.
We've got to drive the complacency out of the system.
We've got to make decisions early, and we've got to get information out to people.
How they treat that and what they do with that is entirely up to them.
But I can tell you one thing, that had we not sent out that message and we'd
had a massive tidal surge and we had 60 body bags, people,
the first thing they would've been saying is, "Why didn't you let us know?"
Exactly.
"We could've been prepared." So, yeah.
Thank you.
You're stuck between a rock and a hard place on that.
But in all fairness to the public-
Mm
... I've really noticed a big change.
Mm.
The public are actually starting to wake up to the fact that they've got some
skin in the game, and they'd rather have the
information. In my view, it's only a very
small, noisy minority that are ones out there sort of
having a crack at us.
Thanks. We've got about four minutes and two subs.
So first, Lamona-
Very quickly
... and then Sir Sydney.
Thank you. And you may have already answered this, Minister.
I was really interested in terms of the education and getting that message out
quickly and people realizing-
Yes
... the seriousness of that.
Yeah.
So you may have already talked about it, but those steps, and I'm focusing on
our young people who have got energy, lots of energy-
Yeah
... to help others.
Yeah.
How sort of will you wrap that up in an AI context as
well?
The AI context is a good
question and not something I've actually looked at.
But we are, with FINZ, in partnership, we made a submission to
the Education Department,
in relation to bringing hazard awareness into the
education
system particularly at the young age.
Because as you actually pointed out, they've not only got the energy,
they've got their parents, they've got their brothers and sisters, they've got
their grandparents and so on,
in terms of the influence that they have.
So I'm very aware of the fact that if you want to get
genuine intergenerational resilience within
our mokopuna, then we actually need to get into the education
system. There are programs in place, both in terms of,
Marae,
but in other areas, but they're still very small, and
fragmented, and we need to centralize this into something
that is more mainstream.
But, yeah, it's a really good point with youth because they do have the energy
to be able to actually
get out and help when we are dealing with those state of emergency.
And you've seen the Student Army who've often
mobilized and support.
I think a big way of dealing with that is actually contained now inside the
Emergency Management Bill, where community pop-up groups now have got a way
of being able to... Because one of the big things that really came through the
Auckland floods is that we had these amazing community pop-up groups that happened.
They had no idea where to get information from, they had no idea
where to send information,
so they really didn't have any direction on how to mobilize young
people in their communities that were there to actually help and to do
it in an organized way. So I think that we've gone a long way
and want to acknowledge the team at NEMA who have worked on this legislation to
make sure that we're actually dealing with those issues that have been forward and
fixing them.
Thanks, Minister.
And Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, I was just going to pick up on the issue around Milford Sound, because
that survivability rate was impressed on me when I was
down there. And I think at that time there were consideration of the concession
for the
accommodation. It's all very well having boats and everything there during the day,
but if you've got a lot of people sitting there at night.
To me, that's one of those examples of intense potential risk,
or relatively intense potential risk,
in terms of what you put where and building things in the wrong places.
So is that the kind of thing that you would...
That has probably already been thought about, but try and say, "Well, don't
intensify the risk in terms of accommodation in particular in that location."
That's critical. Milford Sound is
seen as, advertised as a jewel in the crown of New Zealand.
Adventure training from the window of your bus type thing.
Yeah.
But
those things I think have to be worked through, but you're absolutely right in
terms of don't intensify the risk,
is absolutely critical. The other one, as the minister has pointed out, is people
do have to be able to make decisions themselves.
And it is a balance and-
Well, they need knowledge to do that, of course.
Yeah, exactly. It is a balance, I think, in terms of
we are an adventure capital of the world.
That means that there is
a desire to see places that are inherently
risky. And I'd hate to see us just legislate everything out
so that we can't do anything.
It was more the overnight accommodation arrangements rather than the people during
the day.
That would probably be more a planning issue for local-
Yeah.
Yes
... council.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
But I agree with Dave's comment, is that we don't want to get into a
situation where you've got governments trying to manage the
risk out of everyone's lives because you end up with a dumbed-down
society
that loses the ability to manage their own risk
and take personal ownership of that.
Thank you for your time today. Bring us to an end. We really appreciate it.
Appreciate the engagement and yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks, guys.
Best wishes.
Thank you.
Good to see you all. Yeah. Thank you.